README.md, before:

# Kuadrant Controller

[![Code Style](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/code-style.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/code-style.yaml)
[![Testing](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/testing.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/testing.yaml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache--2.0-blue.svg)](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)

<!--ts-->
* [Kuadrant Controller](#kuadrant-controller)
   * [Overview](#overview)
   * [Architecture](#architecture)
      * [Kuadrant components](#kuadrant-components)
      * [Provided APIs](#provided-apis)
   * [Getting started](#getting-started)
      * [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)
      * [If you are an <em>API Provider</em>](#if-you-are-an-api-provider)
      * [If you are a <em>Cluster Operator</em>](#if-you-are-a-cluster-operator)
   * [User guides](#user-guides)
   * [<a href="/doc/rate-limiting.md">Kuadrant Rate Limiting</a>](#kuadrant-rate-limiting)
   * [Contributing](#contributing)
   * [Licensing](#licensing)

<!-- Created by https://github.com/ekalinin/github-markdown-toc -->
<!-- Added by: eguzki, at: vie 29 jul 2022 14:46:51 CEST -->

<!--te-->

## Overview

Kuadrant is a re-architecture of API Management using Cloud Native concepts and separating the components to be less coupled,
more reusable and leverage the underlying kubernetes platform. It aims to deliver a smooth experience to providers and consumers
of applications & services when it comes to rate limiting, authentication, authorization, discoverability, change management, usage contracts, insights, etc.

Kuadrant aims to produce a set of loosely coupled functionalities built directly on top of Kubernetes.
Furthermore it only strives to provide what Kubernetes doesn’t offer out of the box, i.e. Kuadrant won’t be designing a new Gateway/proxy,
instead it will opt to connect with what’s there and what’s being developed (think Envoy, Istio, GatewayAPI).

Kuadrant is a system of cloud-native k8s components that grows as users’ needs grow.
* From simple protection of a Service (via **AuthN**) that is used by teammates working on the same cluster, or “sibling” services, up to **AuthZ** of users using OIDC plus custom policies.
* From no rate-limiting to rate-limiting for global service protection on to rate-limiting by users/plans

## Architecture

Kuadrant relies on [Istio](https://istio.io/) and the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/)
to operate the cluster (istio's) ingress gateway to provide API management with **authentication** (authN),
**authorization** (authZ) and **rate limiting** capabilities.

### Kuadrant components

| CRD | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Control Plane | The control plane takes the customer desired configuration (declaratively as kubernetes custom resources) as input and ensures all components are configured to obey customer's desired behavior.<br> This repository contains the source code of the kuadrant control plane |
| [Kuadrant Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator) | A Kubernetes Operator to manage the lifecycle of the kuadrant deployment |
| [Authorino](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino) | The AuthN/AuthZ enforcer. As the [external istio authorizer](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom/) ([envoy external authorization](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ext_authz_filter) serving gRPC service) |
| [Limitador](https://github.com/Kuadrant/limitador) | The external rate limiting service. It exposes a gRPC service implementing the [Envoy Rate Limit protocol (v3)](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/service/ratelimit/v3/rls.proto) |
| [Authorino Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino-operator) | A Kubernetes Operator to manage Authorino instances |
| [Limitador Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/limitador-operator) | A Kubernetes Operator to manage Limitador instances |

### Provided APIs

The kuadrant control plane owns the following [Custom Resource Definitions, CRDs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/):

| CRD | Description |
| --- | --- |
| RateLimitPolicy CRD [\[doc\]](/doc/rate-limiting.md) [[reference]](doc/ratelimitpolicy-reference.md) | Enable access control on workloads based on HTTP rate limiting |
| [AuthPolicy CRD](apis/apim/v1alpha1/authpolicy_types.go) | Enable AuthN and AuthZ based access control on workloads |

Additionally, kuadrant provides the following CRDs

| CRD | Owner | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| [Kuadrant CRD](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator/blob/main/api/v1beta1/kuadrant_types.go) | [Kuadrant Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator) | Represents an instance of kuadrant |
| [Limitador CRD](doc/ratelimitpolicy-reference.md) | [Limitador Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/limitador-operator) | Represents an instance of Limitador |
| [Authorino CRD](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino-operator#the-authorino-custom-resource-definition-crd) | [Authorino Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino-operator) | Represents an instance of Authorino |
| [AuthConfig CRD](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino/blob/main/docs/architecture.md#the-authorino-authconfig-custom-resource-definition-crd) | [Authorino](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino) | The desired authN and authZ protection for a service |

![architecture](https://i.imgur.com/0vdUZ0l.png)

## Getting started

### Pre-requisites

* Istio is installed in the cluster. Otherwise, refer to the
[Istio getting started guide](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/).
* Kubernetes Gateway API is installed in the cluster. Otherwise,
[configure Istio to expose a service using the Kubernetes Gateway API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/).
* Kuadrant is installed in the cluster.
Otherwise, refer to the [kuadrant operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator)
for installation.

### If you are an *API Provider*

* Deploy the service/API to be protected ("Upstream")
* Expose the service/API using the kubernetes Gateway API, ie
[HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.HTTPRoute) object.
* Write and apply the Kuadrant's [RateLimitPolicy](/doc/rate-limiting.md) and/or
[AuthPolicy](apis/apim/v1alpha1/authpolicy_types.go) custom resources targeting the HTTPRoute resource
to have your API protected.

### If you are a *Cluster Operator*

* (Optionally) deploy istio ingress gateway using the
[Gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Gateway) resource.
* Write and apply the Kuadrant's [RateLimitPolicy](/doc/rate-limiting.md) and/or
[AuthPolicy](apis/apim/v1alpha1/authpolicy_types.go) custom resources targeting the Gateway resource
to have your gateway traffic protected.

## User guides

The user guides section of the docs gathers several use-cases as well as the instructions to implement them using kuadrant.

* [Simple rate limiting for API owners](doc/user-guides/simple-rl-for-api-owners.md)
* [Authenticated rate limiting for API owners](doc/user-guides/authenticated-rl-for-api-owners.md)
* [Gateway rate limiting for cluster operators](doc/user-guides/gateway-rl-for-cluster-operators.md)

## [Kuadrant Rate Limiting](/doc/rate-limiting.md)

## Contributing

The [Development guide](doc/development.md) describes how to build the kuadrant controller and
how to test your changes before submitting a patch or opening a PR.

Join us on [kuadrant.slack.com](https://kuadrant.slack.com/)
for live discussions about the roadmap and more.

## Licensing

This software is licensed under the [Apache 2.0 license](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

See the LICENSE and NOTICE files that should have been provided along with this software for details.

Commit message:

[readme] Informing the repo has been merged (#218)

README.md, after:

# 🛑 This repository is DEPRECATED!
This project has been merged into [Kuadrant Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator/)
<hr/>

# Kuadrant Controller

[![Code Style](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/code-style.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/code-style.yaml)
[![Testing](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/testing.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-controller/actions/workflows/testing.yaml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache--2.0-blue.svg)](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)

<!--ts-->
* [Kuadrant Controller](#kuadrant-controller)
   * [Overview](#overview)
   * [Architecture](#architecture)
      * [Kuadrant components](#kuadrant-components)
      * [Provided APIs](#provided-apis)
   * [Getting started](#getting-started)
      * [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)
      * [If you are an <em>API Provider</em>](#if-you-are-an-api-provider)
      * [If you are a <em>Cluster Operator</em>](#if-you-are-a-cluster-operator)
   * [User guides](#user-guides)
   * [<a href="/doc/rate-limiting.md">Kuadrant Rate Limiting</a>](#kuadrant-rate-limiting)
   * [Contributing](#contributing)
   * [Licensing](#licensing)

<!-- Created by https://github.com/ekalinin/github-markdown-toc -->
<!-- Added by: eguzki, at: vie 29 jul 2022 14:46:51 CEST -->

<!--te-->

## Overview

Kuadrant is a re-architecture of API Management using Cloud Native concepts and separating the components to be less coupled,
more reusable and leverage the underlying kubernetes platform. It aims to deliver a smooth experience to providers and consumers
of applications & services when it comes to rate limiting, authentication, authorization, discoverability, change management, usage contracts, insights, etc.

Kuadrant aims to produce a set of loosely coupled functionalities built directly on top of Kubernetes.
Furthermore it only strives to provide what Kubernetes doesn’t offer out of the box, i.e. Kuadrant won’t be designing a new Gateway/proxy,
instead it will opt to connect with what’s there and what’s being developed (think Envoy, Istio, GatewayAPI).

Kuadrant is a system of cloud-native k8s components that grows as users’ needs grow.
* From simple protection of a Service (via **AuthN**) that is used by teammates working on the same cluster, or “sibling” services, up to **AuthZ** of users using OIDC plus custom policies.
* From no rate-limiting to rate-limiting for global service protection on to rate-limiting by users/plans

## Architecture

Kuadrant relies on [Istio](https://istio.io/) and the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/)
to operate the cluster (istio's) ingress gateway to provide API management with **authentication** (authN),
**authorization** (authZ) and **rate limiting** capabilities.

### Kuadrant components

| CRD | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Control Plane | The control plane takes the customer desired configuration (declaratively as kubernetes custom resources) as input and ensures all components are configured to obey customer's desired behavior.<br> This repository contains the source code of the kuadrant control plane |
| [Kuadrant Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator) | A Kubernetes Operator to manage the lifecycle of the kuadrant deployment |
| [Authorino](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino) | The AuthN/AuthZ enforcer. As the [external istio authorizer](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom/) ([envoy external authorization](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ext_authz_filter) serving gRPC service) |
| [Limitador](https://github.com/Kuadrant/limitador) | The external rate limiting service. It exposes a gRPC service implementing the [Envoy Rate Limit protocol (v3)](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/service/ratelimit/v3/rls.proto) |
| [Authorino Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino-operator) | A Kubernetes Operator to manage Authorino instances |
| [Limitador Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/limitador-operator) | A Kubernetes Operator to manage Limitador instances |

### Provided APIs

The kuadrant control plane owns the following [Custom Resource Definitions, CRDs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/):

| CRD | Description |
| --- | --- |
| RateLimitPolicy CRD [\[doc\]](/doc/rate-limiting.md) [[reference]](doc/ratelimitpolicy-reference.md) | Enable access control on workloads based on HTTP rate limiting |
| [AuthPolicy CRD](apis/apim/v1alpha1/authpolicy_types.go) | Enable AuthN and AuthZ based access control on workloads |

Additionally, kuadrant provides the following CRDs

| CRD | Owner | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| [Kuadrant CRD](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator/blob/main/api/v1beta1/kuadrant_types.go) | [Kuadrant Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator) | Represents an instance of kuadrant |
| [Limitador CRD](doc/ratelimitpolicy-reference.md) | [Limitador Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/limitador-operator) | Represents an instance of Limitador |
| [Authorino CRD](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino-operator#the-authorino-custom-resource-definition-crd) | [Authorino Operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino-operator) | Represents an instance of Authorino |
| [AuthConfig CRD](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino/blob/main/docs/architecture.md#the-authorino-authconfig-custom-resource-definition-crd) | [Authorino](https://github.com/Kuadrant/authorino) | The desired authN and authZ protection for a service |

![architecture](https://i.imgur.com/0vdUZ0l.png)

## Getting started

### Pre-requisites

* Istio is installed in the cluster. Otherwise, refer to the
[Istio getting started guide](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/).
* Kubernetes Gateway API is installed in the cluster. Otherwise,
[configure Istio to expose a service using the Kubernetes Gateway API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/).
* Kuadrant is installed in the cluster.
Otherwise, refer to the [kuadrant operator](https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator)
for installation.

### If you are an *API Provider*

* Deploy the service/API to be protected ("Upstream")
* Expose the service/API using the kubernetes Gateway API, ie
[HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.HTTPRoute) object.
* Write and apply the Kuadrant's [RateLimitPolicy](/doc/rate-limiting.md) and/or
[AuthPolicy](apis/apim/v1alpha1/authpolicy_types.go) custom resources targeting the HTTPRoute resource
to have your API protected.

### If you are a *Cluster Operator*

* (Optionally) deploy istio ingress gateway using the
[Gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.Gateway) resource.
* Write and apply the Kuadrant's [RateLimitPolicy](/doc/rate-limiting.md) and/or
[AuthPolicy](apis/apim/v1alpha1/authpolicy_types.go) custom resources targeting the Gateway resource
to have your gateway traffic protected.

## User guides

The user guides section of the docs gathers several use-cases as well as the instructions to implement them using kuadrant.

* [Simple rate limiting for API owners](doc/user-guides/simple-rl-for-api-owners.md)
* [Authenticated rate limiting for API owners](doc/user-guides/authenticated-rl-for-api-owners.md)
* [Gateway rate limiting for cluster operators](doc/user-guides/gateway-rl-for-cluster-operators.md)

## [Kuadrant Rate Limiting](/doc/rate-limiting.md)

## Contributing

The [Development guide](doc/development.md) describes how to build the kuadrant controller and
how to test your changes before submitting a patch or opening a PR.

Join us on [kuadrant.slack.com](https://kuadrant.slack.com/)
for live discussions about the roadmap and more.

## Licensing

This software is licensed under the [Apache 2.0 license](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

See the LICENSE and NOTICE files that should have been provided along with this software for details.
